In this video we're going to look at a
new Kotlin feature called the when
expression, now the when expression is
essentially the switch statement on
steroids, seriously I really think you're
going to love this.
So I've already typed in a simple switch
statement in Java, just so we can all be
on the same page, so here I'm assigning
200 to an int variable and then we're
switching on the value of that and if it
equals 100 we'll print 100, if it equals
200 will print 200 etc, if it doesn't
match anything, we'll print didn't match
anything in the default case. So if we
run this, we should see 200 printed and
we do, now another thing that we can do
some people don't recommend this, but
others do and do do it is we can comment
out this break statement and then in
this case, because num is 200 it's going
to match 200 print out 200 and then fall
through to the next case, because it's
going to keep falling through until it
hits a break statement. So in this case,
we're going to see 200 and 300 printed,
So let's run again and indeed we see 200
and 300 printed so that's the switch
statement in Java of course you can also
use strings, they've they enhance this a
little bit, but that's essentially the
switch statement. So now let's go over to
Kotlin and we're going to code the
equivalent statement in Kotlin, so I've
already created the usual project and
package and I've created a file here,
so let's go ahead and instead of using
switch which doesn't exist in Kotlin,
we'll use when, so I'll say val num
equals 200 and then I'll say when and
we're going to test against num, so we'll
say when it's 100 we'll print line 100
when it's 200 we'll print line 200 when it's 300
roll print line 300, else will print line
doesn't match anything. So this when
statement is equivalent to this switch
statement as you can see it's a lot more
concise, one thing you'll notice is we
don't need break and hold that thought
for a minute, because we'll come back to
that. So if we run this now we should see
200 printed because the number is 200,
so let's run it and we'll see that yes
indeed 200 is printed, so let's take a
closer look at this, so we start with the
when keyword followed by the argument in
parentheses and then we have our
possible values. Now just as with the
switch statement, the first option will
be tested first and then the second
option and then the third option,
so they're tested sequentially, but as you
can see instead of using case and the
value in a colon, as you do in Java you
just put the value and then follow it
with an arrow then you have the
statement or statements that you want to
execute. Now, as I said before there is no
break statement it's not required in
Kotlin, under the covers the compiler
inserts a break after each option, now of
course that means we do lose the ability
to do one thing, we cannot do this type
of thing, in Kotlin we can't have one
case dropping through to another case,
I mean some developers would argue that
that was a bad coding practice anyway
but if you've enjoyed taking advantage
of that in the past in your code, you're
not going to be able to do that when you
use the one statement in Kotlin. So in
Kotlin, you can only execute one branch
and that's it, you can't drop through.
Now you're probably looking at this and
thinking well you know big deal apart
from the fact that we don't have to do
as much typing, it's not really all that
different from the switch statement and
in fact, you know we've lost the ability
to drop through to another case,
but we're just getting started.
So let's say we want to return
six-hundred when the value of num is 100
or 600, so what we want is when the value
of num is 100 or 600, we want to print
600, well we do the following
instead of having 100 out on its own, we
could say if it's 100 or 600 and in
this case, we said we want to print 600.
So let's give this a shot, we'll change
this to 100 and we'll run and we'll see
that we get 600 printed and if we change
this to 600, we're going to see the same
thing 600, so when we want to perform the
same code for multiple values, we can
just put all those values on the same
branch separated by commas, now it gets
better, we can use ranges remember we
looked at ranges when we were looking at
the for loop, so we can do something like
if number is 100 to 199, we have to use
the in keyword so in 100 to 99 and we
want to print line, you know in range 100
to 199, so we can do that sort of thing.
So if we change this now to 150 and run,
we'll see that we get in range 100 to
199 printed, so you can use ranges
remember to use the in operator with
them, so you can use ranges as the value
that you want to test against, but you're
not limited to that, we can also use
expressions for the values as follows.
So I'm going to copy and paste this, so I
can write something completely different
now and we'll say val let's say y equals
10 and then I'm going to say when num
we're going to keep it as num and I'm
going to say when num is y plus 80, we're
going to print line 90
or we're going to test also against y+
90 and then we'll print line 100, so you
get the point, so let's change num to 100
up here and we should see the 100
printed because 10 plus 90 is 100.
So let's run and we'll see that we get 100
printed, so you can use expressions as
the values that you test against, but
we're not finished yet,
remember smart casting let's say you
want to handle more than one possible
type, so you want to check what the type
of an object is and then do something
with it depending on the type,
so normally you'd do something like this,
you'd say val let's say obj will make
that of type any and we'll assign it a
string, I'm a string and then we'll have
another object of type any and we'll
give the give this a big decimal
instance, so 25 point 2 and then we'll
say val obj 3 any and we'll make
this an integer 45 and then we'll say
say val something also of type any and
this is going to equal obj 2,
so something actually has a big decimals
instance, so then we'd say you know if
something is string and print line let's
say something dot to uppercase.
Now, because we're using smart casting we can
go ahead and just use it because when we
execute this code the compiler is
positive that we have a string, but we
can also say else if something, else if
something is big decimal then let's say
we'll say print line something dot
remainder and bigdecimal 10.5,
so we'll perform some math here and
return that, otherwise if something is
int then we'll print line something
minus 22. So we do this sort of thing,
we do a bunch of tests to see what type of
object we actually have and then we
execute the code for the type of object.
So if we run, we'll see the result of
dividing 25.2 by 10 and getting the
remainder of that which is four point
something four point the very long list
of decimal places. Now this seems for
both for Kotlin and it is, and I'm sure
you've already guessed that we can do
this in a when expression, rather than
having to do it by doing if else--if
else--if, so let's change this code I'm
just going to comment it out, which I'll
just comment it out from here and let's
do this in a one expression instead.
So we can say when something and we'll say
when it's a string, you want to do our
print line, I'll just copy and paste that
here and I'm writing Java code, but java
on the brain and we'll say when it's a
big decimal and I'll grab what we want
to do for big decimal or if it's an int
and I'll grab what we want to do for an int
So we'll run now and we'll get the exact
same result as before
and notice how smart casting is still in
play, because we're not having to cast in
the code that we execute so the compiler
is confident that when we do
execute one of the branches that we have
the type that we've tested for. So you
can go ahead and use the variable as if
it's of the type that you tested for.
Now, since when is an expression it can be
assigned to a variable, meaning that it
can evaluate to a value, so let's assign
this when statement to a variable so val z
equals and you'll see that we're now
getting an error and can you think about
why we're getting an error now? Think
back to the if case when we used if as
an expression, we had to include
something in the if expression, if you'll
recall, once we use if as an expression
we have to have an else block because
otherwise what will the if expression
evaluate to if the if block isn't
satisfied, the compiler has to be sure
that the expression is going to evaluate
to something and it's the same thing
with when, right now we don't have a
default case, we don't have an else and
that's why we're getting the error. so as
we see the error says the when
expression must be exhaustive
add necessary else branch so we're going to
have an else here so we'll say else
some and we'll print line I have no idea what
type this is and now the error goes away.
So this when expression evaluates to
unit, because all the branches are doing
is print lining and print line returns
unit, so this is what this expression
evaluates to. So if we print z,
we're going to see unit printed, because that's
what's actually going to be assigned
into z, so let's give this a try and sure
enough we see Kotlin dot unit. Now if we want
it to return values, then we'd have to do
something like this so we'd have to say
print line and then we could say well in
this case, I want to turn the value 1
let's return 2 here,
we'll return 3 for this one and for the
else case let's say we return -1, so now
if we write and we print z, we should get
2 printed because something is a big
decimal, so we're executing this branch
here and sure enough, we see 2 printed so
just like with the if, the last statement
or the last value in a block for the
branch, that's going to be the return
value for that branch. Okay so when we
covered enums, I mentioned that you'll
use them a lot with the when expression,
so let's take a look at that. So let's
create an enum, we'll say actually I
don't want to do it inside this function,
I'm going to create it at the top of the
file, so we'll say enum class and we'll
call this one season so rather than
having an array of seasons, as we've
done before, we'll use an enum and we'll
have spring, summer, fall, winter so that's
a very simple enum. So now let's use this
enum with when, so I'll do this at the
top of the file and we'll say val time
of year equals and let's say it's winter,
winter and then we'll say val str equals
when time of year and we'll say if it's
season dot spring, we'll say flowers are
blooming. I should put a blank in here
and then we'll say if it's season dot summer,
it's hot, season dot fall it's getting
cooler and season dot winter I need a
coat, let's say. So here we're returning a
string value for each of the branches.
So let's run and I forgot to print the
string, print line str let's run again,
print line there we go, let's run again
and we'll see I need a coat. Now did you
notice something here? What did I say
just before when I said when we return a
value, we need something that we also
need in the if expression and it turned
out that we needed an else, but we don't
have one here and we're returning a
value. Well, that's because the branches
in this case are exhaustive because
we're using an enum and the compiler
knows that because val is of type season,
time of year is of type season, it knows
that there are only four possible values
and we've listed all those values,
so we're okay if I take one of these out
now, we get the error where it says one
expression must be exhaustive at
necessary winter branch or an else
branch. So when we're using all of our
enums, there's no need to have an else
because the else would never be executed.
All the possible values are accounted
for in this case, so the compiler can
guarantee that a value will be returned,
but as I said before, you can execute
more than one line of code in a branch,
so let's make this a little bit more
interesting, I'm going to use move the
definition of val up, here so I can use
it and for our spring, we'll not only
return a value but will also increment
val by 5, of course I'll have to change
it to a var now so I'll do that.
Now notice that we have to do this above
the return value, we can't do it the
opposite way like this, well we can but
then we're going to get num plus equals
5 into str. So let's try running this and
see what happens. So we're still getting
I need a coat, but if we change this to
spring and run now, we're now getting
Kotlin dot unit, because this doesn't
return anything, an assignment statement
like this doesn't return anything at all,
we're incrementing num by 5, so num gets
105, but this it doesn't return anything.
So as you can see, when you're using
return values, the type of the return
value can be different depending on what
you're doing, but some might argue that
that's not good coding practice, so I'm
going to take this out and I'm going to
move it back up here, because I always
want a string returned. So for winter now,
let's do something a little different as
well, let's say say num equals 22 minus
55, we'll just assign a constant here,
so another case of, you can do something but
you probably shouldn't do it, we've seen
a few of those now, we've seen the one
with you know, you can have a package
name that doesn't match the directory
structure, but you probably shouldn't do
that and here's another one you can have
a one statement that returns different
types depending on the branch of code
but you probably shouldn't do that
because if you're going to use that
return value for anything other than
something like a print line, that can be
done on any type of instance, you're
going to quickly run into trouble,
one last thing with when, you can also use it
without a value and when you use it that
way, it's an alternative for if-else etc.
So let's try it, let's do the following
val num 2 equals minus 50
and then we'll say if num is less than
num2, we'll print line num is less than
num 2, but if num is greater than num 2,
I'm sure you can see where this is going
at this point, we'll print line num is
greater then num2 and of course if num
isn't less than and num isn't greater
than, it must be equal to it. So we'll say
num equals num 2. So that's one way of
writing this but there's a better way to
do it now, using the when, so here we're
not really testing a value, we're testing
two different conditions and then if
both of those conditions fail, we want to
execute a third block of code. So if we
wanted to convert this to a when,
question is what do we- what would we put
in the brackets? Well there isn't really
anything we could put in the brackets
here, so in this case we don't put
anything in the brackets, instead we just
say num less than num 2 and in that case
we want to print line, I'm going to copy
and paste num is less than num 2, on the
other hand if num is greater than num 2,
you want to print line num is greater
than num 2, otherwise we want to print
line num equals num 2, and so this is
equivalent to this and you can see how
much more concise it is, so let's run and
we should see I forget now what num will
be equal, let's see we're doing spring
so num is going to be 105, so num is
greater than minus 50 so I guess we're
expecting to see num is greater than num 2
printed twice from both of these
places, so let's run and we get num is
greater than num 2 printed twice.
So you can see how much more concise
where our guys here, here they are so
this is so much more concise than this
and if you had like a bunch of
if else, if else, if else if and it would
it would be even more concise. So this is
an example of when you wouldn't want to
use a value with the when because really
what value would you put here? Your- you
want to test a bunch of conditions and
you can use the one to do that. So that's
it for the one expression I think you
can see that you can do a lot more with
it than you can with the switch
statement in Java. I'll see you in the next video.